#MAKER-P Genome Annotation using Jbrowse in Atmosphere

MAKER-P is a flexible and scalable genome annotation pipeline that automates the many steps necessary for the detection of protein coding genes (Campbell et al. 2013).  MAKER-P identifies repeats, aligns ESTs and proteins to a genome, produces ab initio gene predictions, and automatically synthesizes these data into gene annotations having evidence-based quality indices.  MAKER-P was developed by the Yandell Lab.  Its predecessor, MAKER, is described in several publications (Cantarel et al. 2008; Holt & Yandell 2011).  Additional background is available at the MAKER Tutorial at GMOD and is highly recommended reading.  MAKER-P v2.28 is currently available as an Atmosphere image and is MPI-enabled for parallel processing.

**Example usage- perfom MAKER annotation on test data:**

1.***Create a run directory in your home and move to that directory, e.g.:***

	`$ mkdir maker_run`

	`$ cd maker_run`

2.***Copy over the control file and test_data:***

	`$ cp ~/Desktop/MAKER-P_example_data/maker_opts.ctl .`
  
  	`$ cp -r ~/Desktop/MAKER-P_example_data/test_data .`

3.***Generate additional needed control files with maker command:***

	`$ maker -EXE`

	`$ maker -BOPTS`

4.***List contents to check previous steps:***

	`$ ls`

	`maker_bopts.ctl  maker_exe.ctl  maker_opts.ctl  test_data`

5.***Initiate run using maker command. Several options are shown:***

	***option 1***: Basic; tons of standard error will print to screen uncaptured:

	`$ maker &`

	***option 2***: Redirect standard error to file and track time:

	`$ (time maker) 2> log_file &`



**Visulizing MAKER output in Jbrowser browser**

This Atmosphere image is enabled to display MAKER-P results in a Jbrowse browser.

To access this instance of Jbrowse over the web you will need to start the 
apache web server.  In the terminal type the following command:


1.`$ sudo /usr/sbin/apachectl start`

2.You will also need to know the host name of this instance:

`$ echo $HOSTNAME`

Example output might be:
`vm64-134.iplantcollaborative.org`

3.Copy and paste the host name into a web browser address bar and hit return.
The browser should navigate to a welcome page, indicating that everything is
working correctly so far.  (Most browsers will autmatically convert this to:
http://vm64-134.iplantcollaborative.org/).

4.To access the Jbrowse, simply add to the existing URL as follows:

`http://vm64-134.iplantcollaborative.org/jbrowse/JBrowse-1.11.5/`

Then click on the "rice_example" link.  The browser shows output of the MAKER-P tutorial. 

**To load your data into a Jbrowse:**

***Step 1) Create a directory in the Jbwrowse data directory to hold your data:***

	$ cd /var/www/jbrowse/JBrowse-1.11.5/data
	
	$ sudo mkdir genus_species #substitute your organism name

***Step 2) Run the load script supplied by Jbrowse. First change directories up one level.***

	Here we will load the output from the example data used in the Atmosphere tutorial 
	is in the directory "maker_run" in your home directory.
	
	$ cd /var/www/jbrowse/JBrowse-1.11.5/
	
	$ sudo ./bin/maker2jbrowse -d ~/maker_run/test_genome.maker.output/test_genome_master_datastore_index.log -o ./data/genus_species/

***Step 4) Edit the organisms.conf to tell Jbrowse there is a new species, using a text editor such as nano.***

	$ cd /var/www/jbrowse/JBrowse-1.11.5/data
	
	$ nano organisms.conf
	
	#Add lines similar to these:
	[datasets.genus_species]
	name = genus_species	
	url = ?data=data/genus_species
	
***Step 5) Restart apache***

	$ sudo /usr/sbin/apachectl restart

Now when you go to http://vm64-134.iplantcollaborative.org/jbrowse/JBrowse-1.11.5/ the page should list your new
browser along with others that are available (e.g. rice_example).

If your new data are not be displayed it could be because of your web-browser cache.  Clear the cache
and try again.

***Notes:***

	1) The Jbrowse will only exist as long as your instance is up.  It will go away once
	your instance is terminated.  
	
	2) If you request your instance get imaged, then you should be able to access the Jbrowser
	in the future after launching a new instance of the saved image.  Note however the URL will be
	different and you will probably need to start apache as described above.
	
	3) An alternative to creating your own Jbrowse is to upload your data to CoGe, which provides
	a Jbrowse display service.  See: https://genomevolution.org/LoadAnnotation.pl
	
	4) See also additional instruction on setting up Jbrowse: http://jbrowse.org/code/JBrowse-1.11.5/docs/tutorial/
